Okay, now let's reverse the mirror.
Maybe it'd be good to ask you
(playwrights) what you expect.
So the script's been
submitted and accepted,
and JK, Chris, and
Angeli are excited.
What kind of process
do you expect?
Because the usual attitude,
well not usual,
it’s not really usual
some of the attitudes
of playwrights is,
"Here it is, it's up to you."
"Surprise me."
What kind of relationship--
do you expect
with the director,
with the actors and
with the whole production?
When I write or if it's a
comissioned work,
I always see
my script as a proposal.
It's like submitting my
personal proposal.
to those people there.
I see it as a collaborative process.
I'm not saying
my script's the bible,
I believe there are still
a lot of gaps in between
because I'm just one writer.
I believe the director's pulse is important.
I just hope while working
on the script,
they look at what works
and what doesn't
I'm kind of expecting also
to be part of the process
in terms of the
actors' rehearsal,
if there's something to contribute.
In order to clean it up,
to improve, to argue
why you think
this works or not,
then we input it on Word.
I see the text as something open
in the first part of the process.
We can still work on it
with the help of the actors,
directors, production designer.
Only after it's mounted or formed
can we say if it needs
improving or not.
I see the text or the script
as a never-ending--
not really never-ending,
but a process-driven
kind of meaning-making
or art-making.
I like that collaborative process
with the director
and with the actors.
Especially the actors,
they'd really anchor themselves
on one particular character,
whether it’s their
character that they’re doing
or they’re just reading
for that particular session,
where there's a lot
of questions like
“Where did this line come from?”
which would also make
the writers wonder.
And it could really change
the whole script.
Is it like defending
your thesis or something?
Defend, but you're open--
To suggestions and ideas.
Sometimes you'll see
from version 1 to version 8,
or even to version 2,
that there's already a huge change.
It’s all with trust that they’re all
contributing to make this a better work.
It's also a bit
ego-crushing, isn't it?
The fact that you worked hard on it
for so many months,
and when they read it,
"Why's it like this?"
"Can we change this part
'cause I don't understand it..."
So you feel that there's something
that you really have to set aside.
Do you have a negotiable,
a non-negotiable?
‘Cause I understand
when you’re a young writer,
your tendency
is of course you want to...
Are there things in your script
that are non-negotiable?
Not non-negotiable,
but I think it’s clear to you
this is really the storytelling,
main things you want to say.
Is there anything like that?
Or are you completely open to it?
If it's the main premise I sent.
For example, a story
about a dog that ate something.
If that's taken out,
"That was the point,
why'd you take it out?"
It's not supposed to be
an ego-crushing thing.
Both sides are trying to--
As a producer, a director,
I'm also trying to catch myself
I shouldn't be--
it should still be the writer.
We're there to improve on it
and make it better,
but I think it's still
the writer's text.
And I think that’s what
I constantly try to remind myself
when we're working
that way, right?
- To still honor the--
- The play.
At the end of the day,
your name should be there
because those ideas are yours.
It might also depend on the form.
The play form.
Like for example, straight plays.
Writers have a bigger hand in it.
For musicals,
music plays a large part,
especially the composer, book writer,
director, and choreographer.
Usually, changes occur
from the original story
that was conceived
by the writer.
In terms of director-writer relationship,
you could bend
or stretch it a little,
but don't break the spine.
Don't break the spine,
otherwise, just write your own play.
I guess because you agreed,
why you said yes in first place.
Yeah?
Speaking of ego-crushing,
we have an interesting dynamic.
Of course we're excited
because it's our first play together.
And we built our own characters.
We talked about why
we did the play and so on
She's a prostitute and I'm like
the town fool-turned-hitman.
A vicious hitman.
Because of the setting,
we humanized the characters
since we felt the setting
and the costumes were enough to--
Indicate?
Indicate the play's grotesqueness.
So we felt our role was to
humanize our characters.
So we did a run of the play.
When it was time
for the company call
with notes and all,
"Okay, so it's like this,"
"We liked how it turned out,"
"But Ross uh,
Uod (my role) is just plain evil."
Like Joker?
They were just going for
of a needy character
so we just said "Okay."
But we were
sort of devastated
because the arc we built
for our characters were discarded.
The next day we rehearsed
everything totally changed.
So we just did
what we were told.
You mean the attack?
Everything!
Really everything.
It felt like, now that I recall--
It's coming back to you.
It was presented as this
and we felt it was our job to--
- Layer it?
- Yes, to layer it.
And make it relatable at least,
if not for the whole audience,
then for some people.
So when we were given
those instructions
- Very linear.
- We couldn't understand
But now that I think about it, I think
that kind of style could really be
what the writer wanted to happen.
We have to adapt with to the style.
I think this is,
what Ross shared, just shows us
the very rich, but at the same time
dangerous terrain of collaboration.
Dangerous in a wonderful way
because it turns out
the original work being worked on,
is not a finished text
when it enters the rehearsal hall.
It needs to be
opened up again.
Remember,
the moment you give that,
an original work or new work,
to a group of collaborators,
directors, actors,
designers,
what-have-you,
it’s practically open
to multiple readings.
The designer
visualizes her reading.
The director makes an act
from her reading.
The actor adds a layer as well.
And I think, presuming
that the playwright
seizes the opportunity
to collaborate
and is open to collaborate
to begin with,
I think it’s a wonderful start
of a creative process.
After the text, I remember working
with Maynard and Dingdong,
on "Kafatiran"
and "Symposium".
When the text is there,
when the playwright is there,
my immediate task is to determine
the kind of suspension of disbelief needed.
Will we commit to this world
we're creating?
The text will develop from there.
Subtexts will spring up.
Sometimes, the director
or actors carry it out.
It's always in consultation.
For example, we we're given four
gay Katipuneros.
They need not be fleshed out,
they could just be gays for all we know.
But the narrative
has a point of view.
It could be based
on a research in the 1800s
so the presentation
of femininity is different and so on.
Dangerous in a wonderful way
because it turns out
the original work being worked on,
is not a finished text
when it enters the rehearsal hall.
It needs to be
opened up again.
Remember,
the moment you give that,
an original work or new work,
to a group of collaborators,
directors, actors,
designers,
what-have-yous,
it’s practically open
to multiple readings.
The designer
visualizes her reading.
The director makes an act
from her reading.
The actor adds layer as well.
And I think, presuming
that the playwright
seizes the opportunity
to collaborate
and is open to collaborate
to begin with,
I think it’s a wonderful start
of a creative process.
After the text, I remember working
with Maynard and Dingdong,
on "Kafatiran"
and "Symposium".
When the text is there,
when the playwright is there,
my immediate task is to determine
the kind of suspension of disbelief needed.
Will we take responsibility
of the world?
The text will develop from there.
Subtexts will spring up.
Sometimes, the director
or actors carry it out.
It's always for consultation.
If we're given four
gay Katipuneros,
doesn't have to be fleshed out,
they could just be gays.
But the narrative
has a point of view.
It could be based
on a research in the 1800s.
so the presentation
of femininity is different.